Read the paper in "Paper content" section, and answer a list of questions in "Questions" section below,

## For each question:

Step 1: get the question, store as "question".
Step 2: extract two or three sentences from the "paper content" that can be used to answer the question, separate them using '.', store as 'evidence'.
Step 3: provide the rationale about how you found the answer from the content in details, store as 'rationale'.
Step 4: answer the question, store as 'answer'.
Step 5: format your answer in the format:

"""
Question: <question>

Evidence: <evidence>

Rationale: <rationale>

Answer: <answer>
"""

Make sure you answer all the questions.


## Paper content:

```
# Prevalence of drug resistance and importance of viral load measurements in Honduran HIV-infected patients failing antiretroviral treatment

## Abstract

### Objective

The Honduran HIV/AIDS Program began to scale up access to HIV therapy in 2002. Up to May 2008, more than 6000 patients received combination antiretroviral therapy (cART). As HIV drug resistance is the major obstacle for effective treatment, the purpose of this study was to assess the prevalence of antiretroviral drug resistance in Honduran HIV-1-infected individuals.

### Methods

We collected samples from 138 individuals (97 adults and 41 children) on cART with virological, immunological or clinical signs of treatment failure. HIV-1 *pol* sequences were obtained using an in-house method. Resistance mutations were identified according to the 2007 International AIDS Society (IAS)-USA list and predicted susceptibility to cART was scored using the anrs algorithm.

### Results

Resistance mutations were detected in 112 patients (81%), 74% in adults and 98% in children. Triple-, dual- and single-class drug resistance was documented in 27%, 43% and 11% of the study subjects, respectively. Multiple logistic regression showed that resistance was independently associated with type of treatment failure \[virological failure (odds ratio (OR)=1) *vs* . immunological failure (OR=0.11; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.030--0.43) *vs* . clinical failure (OR=0.037; 95% CI 0.0063--0.22)\], route of transmission (OR=42.8; 95% CI 3.73--491), and years on therapy (OR=1.81; 95% CI 1.11--2.93).

### Conclusion

The prevalence of antiretroviral resistance was high in Honduran HIV-infected patients with signs of treatment failure. A majority of study subjects showed dual- or triple-class resistance to nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and protease inhibitors. Virologically defined treatment failure was a strong predictor of resistance, indicating that viral load testing is needed to correctly identify patients with treatment failure attributable to resistance.

::: section


## Materials and methods

### Patients

Patients were invited to participate in the study by their medical
doctors. After they had consented, whole blood was collected in BD
Vacutainer ^®^ Cell Preparation Tubes (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes,
NJ, USA) to obtain plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs). The study samples were collected between June 2004 and April
2007. Our patients were selected from the two major medical facilities
in the country, Instituto Nacional del Tórax in Tegucigalpa and Hospital
Mario Catarino Rivas in San Pedro Sula, but are likely to be
representative of patients failing cART in the country. The inclusion
criterion was signs of treatment failure after more than 6 months of
therapy. Treatment failure was divided into three hierarchical
categories (virological, immunological and clinical treatment failure)
because access to plasma HIV-1 RNA and CD4 T-lymphocyte quantification
was irregular during the study period. Thus, virological treatment
failure was defined as plasma viral load (VL) \>1000 copies/mL (VL
determined a maximum of 6 months prior to the resistance test). For
patients who did not fulfil the criteria for virological treatment
failure, immunological treatment failure was defined as CD4
\<250 cells/μL (CD4 count determined a maximum of 6 months prior to the
resistance test). For patients who did not fulfil the criteria for
virological or immunological treatment failure, clinical treatment
failure was defined as the development of opportunistic infection or
other clinical symptoms indicating disease progression.

The ethics committee at the National Autonomous University of Honduras
and the Regional Medical Ethics Board in Stockholm, Sweden approved the
study (Dnr. 21/2007-77).

### Measurements of plasma HIV-1 RNA levels and CD4 cell counts

Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels (VL) were measured using an Amplicor HIV-1
monitor system (Roche, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) or the Real-Time PCR HIV-1
system (Abbott Laboratories, Des Plaines, IL). CD4 cell counts were
measured using the Dynal ^®^ T4 Quant Kit (Dynal Biotech ASA, Oslo,
Norway).

### Estimation of adherence

Adherence to HIV therapy was scored as good, intermediate or poor by
self-reporting by the patients in face-to-face interviews during
ordinary clinical visits and from the medical records. The scoring
system has been established by the Ministry of Health in Honduras
following the Spanish recommendations \[ 13 \]. Thus, adherence was
scored as good when the patients reported having missed fewer than three
doses in the last month; intermediate when three to 12 doses had been
missed, and poor when more than 12 doses had been missed.

### Genotypic HIV-1 resistance testing

Blood samples (10--20 mL of sodium citrate-treated whole blood) for
genotypic resistance testing were collected in Honduras. Plasma and
PBMCs were separated in a polyester gel and a density gradient liquid
(BD Vacutainer ^™^ CPT ^™^ Tube) and stored at −80 °C in Honduras before
shipment to Sweden for genotypic resistance testing.

Resistance testing was carried out on plasma RNA or PBMC DNA using an
in-house method. Briefly, RNA or DNA was extracted from plasma or PBMCs
using the QIAmp RNA or DNA kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The RNA was
used to generate cDNA, whereas the DNA was directly used for polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). A nested PCR for the *pol* gene was performed for
sequencing using a reaction mixture and cycling conditions as described
previously \[ 14 \], with some modification of primers. The PCR primers
were JA269 (outer forward AGGAAGGACACCARATGAARGA), JA272 (outer reverse
GGATAAATCTGA CTTGCCCART), JA270 (inner forward GCTTCCCTCARATCACTCTT) and
JA271 (inner reverse CCACTAAYTTCTGTATRTCATTGAC). The sequencing primers
were JA273 (outer forward CCCTCAAATCACTCTTTGGC), JA274 (inner forward
AAAATC CATACAATACTCCA), JA275 (inner reverse TTATTGAGTTCTCTGAAATC) and
JA276 (outer reverse TGTATATCATTGACAGTCCA). DNA sequencing was performed
on an ABI Prism ^™^ 3100 Genetic Analyser (Applied Biosystems,
Stockholm, Sweden). The sequence fragments were assembled and analysed
using the software program sequencher ^™^ (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA). The HIV-1 *pol* sequences have been submitted to
GenBank under accession numbers FJ800379--FJ800386, FJ800388--FJ800438,
FJ800440--FJ800505 and FJ823645--FJ823657.

Major and minor resistance mutations according to the 2007 list of the
International AIDS Society--USA Panel Guidelines \[ 9 \] were identified
using the Stanford hivdb program ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu ). The
predicted susceptibilities of the viruses to NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs were
estimated using the ANRS algorithm (July 2008, version 17;
http://www.medpocket.com ). The resistance profiles were used together
with clinical data and other laboratory data to provide individualized
expert advice on possible treatment modifications, taking into account
the fact that some registered antiretroviral drugs are not available in
Honduras.

The *pol* gene sequences and recommended subtype reference sequences (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov ) were also used to construct neighbour-joining
phylogenetic trees using the mega 4 software \[ 15 \]. Phylogenetic tree
analysis was used to determine the subtype of the *pol* gene sequence
and to facilitate detection of possible PCR contamination and sample
mix-up.

### Statistical methods

The prevalence of drug resistance mutations was calculated with a 95%
confidence interval (CI) based on the binomial distribution. Univariable
and multivariable logistic regression analyses were used to estimate
odds ratios (ORs) with 95% CIs for the association between resistance
status and various factors. Statistical analyses were carried out using
statistica version 8.0 (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA) and stata version
8.2 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA).

::: section

## Results

A total of 138 HIV-1-infected individuals with treatment failure were
included in the study ( Table 2 ); 97 were adults and 41 were children
under 18 years of age. A little more than half of the study subjects
were male (57%). The median age was 38 years for the adults and 10 years
for the children. All individuals were native Hondurans; the most
frequent route of transmission was heterosexual transmission (66%),
followed by mother-to-child transmission (28%), blood products (3%) and
homosexual transmission (3%). The severity of disease according to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Classification System
\[ 16 \] was stage A for 12 patients, stage B for 60 patients and stage
C for 66 patients. Adherence was scored as good in 99 patients (72%),
intermediate in 26 patients (19%) and poor in 13 patients (9%). The
median time on antiretroviral therapy was 3.2 years (range 1--12 years).
The median CD4 count was 185 cells/μL and the median VL was 4.5 log ~10~
copies/mL ( Table 2 ). The median time span between sampling for the
resistance test and the last available CD4 cell count was 5 months
(range 0--36 months); one patient had never undergone CD4 cell count
measurements. The median time span between the last VL measurement and
sampling for resistance was 5 months (range 0--25 months); seven
patients had never undergone VL testing. Only 37 patients (28%) had CD4
cell counts and VL determined simultaneously with the resistance test.


The patients were recruited using three different criteria for treatment
failure (virological, immunological and clinical) because access to
plasma HIV-1 RNA and CD4 quantification was irregular during the study
period. Table 2 shows that 51% of the treatment failures were identified
virologically, 21% immunologically and 28% clinically.

At the time of sampling for resistance testing, 50% of the patients were
receiving two NRTIs+one NNRTI, 47% were receiving two NRTIs+one PI, and
3% were receiving triple-class therapy (one NRTI+one NNRTI+one PI). The
most common drug combinations were: zidovudine+lamivudine+efavirenz (40
patients), stavudine+lamivudine+nelfinavir (13 patients),
stavudine+lamivudine+nevirapine (12 patients), and
zidovudine+lamivudine+indinavir (nine patients).

Genotyping of HIV resistance was performed in all 138 study subjects
using an in-house resistance assay. As described in the Materials and
Methods and for logistical reasons (i.e. safe transport of high-quality
samples to Sweden), the majority of the sequences were obtained from
PBMCs, whereas 42 resistance tests were performed using both PBMC DNA
and plasma RNA. We compared the mutational resistance patterns in plasma
and PBMCs for these 42 patients and observed a high concordance (data
not shown). Thus, 97% of the observed resistance mutations were
concordantly detected in plasma and PBMCs. All *pol* sequences were of
HIV-1 genetic subtype B. We did not find any unexpected close clustering
or identical sequences, which indicates that we did not experience
problems with PCR contamination.

At least one major drug resistance mutation was documented in 112 of the
138 patients (81%; 95% CI 79--91%) ( Table 2 ). Resistance was more
common in the samples from children (98%; 95% CI 87--99) than in those
from adults (74%; 95% CI 64--82) ( *P* =0.011). Resistance was also
strongly related to route of transmission ( *P* =0.010), which was not
unexpected given the significant difference between adults and children.
Resistance was significantly more prevalent in patients in whom
treatment failure had been identified virologically as compared with
immunologically ( *P* \<0.001) or clinically ( *P* =0.019).

Of the study subjects, 80 patients (58%) had started treatment after
2002 within the frame of the National HIV/AIDS cART Program and thus
should have received triple combination therapy in a systematic way.
Sixty of these patients (75%) displayed drug resistance mutations after
a median time on cART of 2.6 years. There were 58 study subjects (42%)
who had begun therapy before 2002 (before the start of the National
HIV/AIDS Program); they had a median time on ART of 6 years, and 52 of
them (90%) showed drug resistance mutations. Of these patients, 52% had
started with mono or dual therapy, whereas 48% had been started on a
triple combination, but as described below almost all had had
discontinuous ART and many treatment changes. Start of therapy before or
within the national treatment programme was significantly associated
with the prevalence of resistance ( *P* =0.035). Resistance was also
strongly correlated to years on therapy ( *P* =0.001).

The patients had received a median of two (range one to six) different
ART regimens ( Table 2 ). Resistance was positively correlated with the
number of treatment changes ( *P* =0.005). Thus, resistance was
documented in 20 of 30 patients (67%) who were on their first regimen
*vs* . 15 of 15 patients (100%) who had undergone at least five
treatment changes. Only 22% of the patients remained on first-line
therapy. The remaining patients had undergone one or several treatment
changes. The majority of these treatment changes (49%) were made
rationally (e.g. because of suspected treatment failure or drug
toxicity), in 12% of the cases the treatment changes were irrational
(e.g. because of cost or interrupted drug supplies) and 17% of the
changes involved treatment interruption (often because of cost or
interrupted drug supplies) ( Table 2 ). CDC stage and self-reported
adherence levels were not significantly correlated to resistance,
whereas CD4 cell counts and plasma HIV RNA levels were significantly
correlated to resistance. However, it should be pointed out that these
CD4 and HIV RNA levels frequently were not obtained concomitantly with
the resistance test and often not even while the patient was on the same
therapy as when the resistance test was carried out.

Multiple logistic regression was used to identify variables that were
independently associated with the presence of genotypic resistance. The
final model includes as categorical variables: route of infection, start
of therapy within the national treatment programme (yes/no) and type of
virological failure (virological, immunological or clinical). Number of
treatment changes and years on therapy were included as continuous
variables. Age (adult *vs* . child) was not included as a variable
because it largely overlapped with route of infection. CD4 cell counts
and HIV RNA were not included because results were not available for all
patients and often were obtained long before the sample used for
resistance testing. The multivariable analysis identified the following
variables as independently associated with resistance: type of treatment
failure \[virological failure (OR=1) *vs* . immunological failure
(OR=0.11; 95% CI 0.030--0.43) *vs* . clinical failure (OR=0.037; 95% CI
0.0063--0.22)\]; route of transmission (OR=42.8; 95% CI 3.73--491); and
years on therapy (OR=1.81; 95% CI 1.11--2.93). This indicates that VL
testing was needed to correctly identify patients with treatment failure
attributable to resistance.

As shown in Table 3 , genotypes predicted to have reduced susceptibility
to at least one NRTI were observed in 98 of 138 patients (71%; 95% CI
63--78%); to at least one NNRTI in 96 patients (70%; 95% CI 61--77%);
and to at least one PI in 51 patients (37%; 95% CI 29--45%). Dual and
triple class resistance was very common. Thus, triple-class drug
resistance was documented in 37 of the 138 study subjects (27%; 95% CI
20--35%) and dual-class drug resistance was detected in 59 patients
(43%; 95% CI 34--51%), whereas only 16 (12%; 95% CI 7--18) of the
patients showed single-class resistance.



During their treatment history, 45 patients had received treatment with
two classes of drug (NRTIs+NNRTIs); 15 of these patients did not display
resistance, four had resistance to one class of drug (three to NNRTIs
and one to NRTIs), 25 had two-class resistance (24 to NRTIs+NNRTIs and
one to NRTIs+PIs), and one patient had three-class resistance
(NRTIs+NNRTIs+PIs). Ninety-three patients had taken at least one PI in
their treatments: 11 of them showed no resistance; 12 displayed
resistance to one class of drug (eight to NNRTIs, two to NRTIs and two
to PIs); 34 patients showed resistance to two classes of drug (23 to
NRTIs+NNRTIs, 10 to NRTIs+PIs and one to NNRTIs+PIs), and 37 showed
resistance to three classes of drug.

Figure 1 shows the resistance mutations that were observed in the study
population. At least one thymidine-associated mutation (TAM), that is a
mutation at position 41, 67, 210, 215 or 219 in RT, was seen in 60% of
patients, and the lamivudine/emtricitabine resistance mutation M184I/V
was observed in 62% of the patients. Multi-nucleoside resistance
mutations, such as Q151M, were rare and such a mutation was only
observed in one patient. The K103N mutation was the most frequently
observed (30%) of the NNRTI resistance mutations. A smaller proportion
of the study subjects (32%) had at least one major PI resistance
mutation; for example, a mutation at position 30, 46, 82, 84, 88 or 90
of PR.

::: section

## Discussion

The present study describes the prevalence of genotypic resistance to
antiretroviral drugs in clinical samples from 138 Honduran patients who
were failing ART. It was found that the prevalence of resistance was
high (81%) in our study population. Thus, resistance to at least one
drug class was found in 11% of the patients, dual class resistance was
found in 43% of the patients and triple class resistance was found in
27% of the patients. The proportion of individuals with resistance was
higher among children (98%) than among adults (74%). The type of
treatment failure (virological, immunological or clinical) was the
strongest predictor of resistance, but route of transmission and years
on therapy were also independently associated with the presence of
genotypic resistance.

Our study revealed that there are considerable problems with resistance
to antiretroviral drugs in Honduras. However, it is important to stress
that our results do not reflect the prevalence of resistance among all
HIV-infected patients in Honduras, because the study subjects were
selected on the basis of treatment failure. Nevertheless, it is worrying
that dual- and triple-class resistance was very common. Furthermore, we
observed that treatment changes were common and associated with a higher
prevalence of resistance, as was years on therapy.

Our review of the patient records revealed that many of the treatment
changes were not driven by laboratory results indicating treatment
failure, primarily because access to plasma HIV-1 RNA and CD4
quantification was irregular during the study period. Instead, treatment
changes had often been initiated as a consequence of clinical
progression or interrupted access to specific antiretroviral drugs.
Thus, the resistance problems in our study population appear in part to
be attributable to limited and interrupted access to treatment, but also
involve problems with adherence and the prior use of mono and dual
therapy. Importantly, the definition of treatment failure (virological,
immunological or clinical) was the strongest predictor of resistance.
Immunological and clinical treatment failure were categorised as
inclusion criteria because access to plasma HIV-1 RNA and CD4
quantification was irregular during the study period. The finding that
immunological and clinical criteria were poor predictors of treatment
failure attributable to resistance is important and has relevance for
other resource-poor settings where access to VL testing may be limited.
Our results are in agreement with recent data which also show that CD4
cell counts and clinical criteria do not accurately identify patients
with virological treatment failure \[ 17--19 \].

In this study, we estimated that the overall prevalence of
resistance-associated mutations was 81% among the investigated Honduran
patients, who were selected on the basis of signs and symptoms of
treatment failure. This finding agrees well with results from the United
Kingdom (80% resistance) \[ 10 \], United States (76% resistance) \[ 11
\], and France (88% resistance) \[ 12 \], in spite of the fact that the
cART conditions in these countries are very different from those in
Honduras. It is somewhat surprising that 19% of the 138 studied patients
did not appear to harbour a resistant virus even though they had been
selected as experiencing treatment failure. The absence of resistance in
19% of the patients indicates that adherence in these patients may have
been too low to drive the development of resistance. However, and as
discussed above, the significant association of resistance with type of
failure (virological, immunological or clinical) also demonstrates that
it is difficult to monitor HIV therapy without regular access to plasma
HIV-1 quantification. Thus, patients with adequate adherence and low
plasma HIV RNA levels may incorrectly have been perceived to have
immunological or clinical treatment failure.

We observed that the presence of genotypic resistance was positively
correlated with years on therapy and the number of ART regimens used.
When this study was carried out, access in Honduras to boosted PIs was
very limited. The broad resistance to NRTIs, NNRTIs and unboosted PIs
indicates that many of our study subjects were in need of salvage
therapy with boosted PIs as well as entry and integrase inhibitors \[ 3
\]. Improved access to these drugs is urgently needed for these and
other heavily treatment-experienced Honduran patients. M184V and K103N
were the most prevalent NRTI and NNRTI mutations in our study, at 62%
and 30%, respectively. M184V causes high-level (\>100-fold) resistance
to lamivudine/emtricitabine and emerges rapidly in patients who receive
lamivudine monotherapy \[ 20 \]. It is also the first mutation to
develop in patients receiving partially suppressive triple combination
therapy including lamivudine \[ 21--23 \]. K103N is the most clinically
important NNRTI resistance mutation. It causes 20- to 50-fold resistance
to the most available NNRTIs, which is sufficient to cause virological
failure \[ 24,25 \]. It was not surprising to find a high frequency of
the K103N mutation because of the common use of NNRTIs in Honduras and
the ability of the virus to develop NNRTI resistance mutations during
monotherapy and during incomplete viral suppression \[ 25 \].

Some limitations of our analysis should be mentioned. The patients were
classified as failing their current cART based on virological,
immunological, and/or clinical data; but some patients may incorrectly
have been classified as failing their current regimen because access to
laboratory monitoring is limited in Honduras. Furthermore, for
logistical reasons (i.e. safe transport of high-quality samples to
Sweden), only 42 resistance tests were performed using plasma samples
and the remaining sequences were obtained from PBMCs. We compared the
mutational resistance patterns in plasma and PBMCs for these 42 patients
and observed a high concordance. Similar results have been shown in
other studies \[ 26--28 \]. Thus, we feel that it is unlikely that our
findings have been significantly affected by the fact that most
resistance tests were carried out on PBMC DNA. Another potential
limitation of our study is that it is difficult to precisely estimate
the representativeness of our study population with regard to all
patients failing ART in Honduras because there is no reliable
information about how many patients have successful *vs* . failing
first- or second-line therapy.

In conclusion, we have documented a high prevalence of resistance to
antiretroviral drugs in this sample of antiretroviral-treated adult and
paediatric HIV-infected patients in Honduras. Most of the treatment
failures observed in these patients can be attributed to the previous
use of mono and dual therapy and to limited and interrupted access to
antiretroviral drugs in this country. Irregular access to CD4 and VL
testing is an additional problem. Similarly, there is a need to
establish access to routine resistance testing in Honduras, and this is
one of the overall aims of the bilateral collaboration between Honduras
and Sweden. In our study, virological failure was the strongest
predictor of resistance. This suggests that plasma HIV RNA
quantification may be clinically beneficial and cost effective through
preventing unnecessary treatment changes. Thus, the management of these
heavily treatment-experienced HIV-infected patients represents a
considerable challenge for HIV clinicians in Honduras. There is an
urgent need for improved and sustainable access to antiretroviral drugs,
including boosted PIs, newly introduced NNRTIs, and entry and integrase
inhibitors, as well as VL, CD4 and resistance testing.


```

## Questions:

1. Does the paper report HIV sequences from patient samples?
2. Does the paper report in vitro drug susceptibility data?
3. What were the GenBank accession numbers for sequenced HIV isolates?
4. Which HIV species were studied in the paper?
5. Which HIV genes were reported to have been sequenced?
6. From which countries were the sequenced samples obtained?
7. From what years were the sequenced samples obtained?
8. What method was used for sequencing?
9. Were samples cloned prior to sequencing?
10. Did samples undergo single genome sequencing?
11. What type of samples were sequenced?
12. Were any sequences obtained from individuals with virological failure on a treatment regimen?
13. Were any sequences obtained from the proviral DNA reservoir?
14. Were the patients in the study in a clinical trial?
15. How many individuals had samples obtained for HIV sequencing?
16. Does the paper report HIV sequences from individuals who had previously received ARV drugs?
17. Which drug classes were received by individuals in the study before sample sequencing?
18. Which drugs were received by individuals in the study before sample sequencing?
19. Were sequences from the paper made publicly available?
